
Computational Modeling of Relationships, Spin, and Betrayal

Computational approaches allow us to understand how text encodes
latent social factors.  My talk focuses on recent work that
attempts to use unannotated or found annotations to better understand
relationships in the real world, in fiction, and in games.  First,
I'll discuss a probabilistic model that attempts to predict the
political polarization of a speaker based on how they frame policy
issues.  Based on data from the US congress, we describe the Tea Party
movement and its relationship to mainstream Republicans.  Next, I'll
discuss a deep dictionary learning approach to categorize the
relationships between fictional characters over time.  We'll show that
this approach improves over topic model baselines in both prediction
and human interpretability.  Finally, I'll discuss work to detect
deception in an online game called Diplomacy and which clues can
predict betrayal.

================================================================

Title: Thinking on your Feet: Reinforcement Learning for Incremental Language Tasks

Abstract: 

In this talk, I'll discuss two real-world language applications that require "thinking on your feet": synchronous machine translation (or "machine simultaneous interpretation") and question answering (when questions are revealed one piece at a time).  In both cases, effective algorithms for these tasks must interrupt the input stream and decide when to provide output.

Synchronous machine translation is when a sentence is being produced one word at a time in a foreign language and we want to produce a translation in English simultaneously (i.e., with as little delay between a foreign language word and its English translation). This is particularly difficult in verb-final languages like German or Japanese, where an English translation can barely begin until the verb is seen. Effective translation thus requires predictions of unseen elements of the sentence (e.g., the main verb in German and Japanese, or relative clauses in Japanese, or post-positions in Japanese). We use reinforcement learning to decide when to trust our verb predictions. It must learn to balance incorrect translation versus timely translations, and must use those predictions to translate the sentence.

For question answering, we use a specially designed dataset that challenges humans: a trivia game called quiz bowl. These questions are written so that they can be interrupted by someone who knows more about the answer; that is, harder clues are at the start of the question and easier clues are at the end of the question. We create a novel neural network system to predict answers from incomplete questions and use reinforcement learning to decide when to guess.  We are able to answer questions earlier in the questions than most college trivia contestants.

================================================================

Title:

Big Data Analysis with Topic Models: Human Interaction and Social
Science Applications

Abstract:

A common information need is to understand large, unstructured
datasets: millions of e-mails during e-discovery, a decade worth of
science correspondence, or a day's tweets.  In the last decade, topic
models have become a common tool for navigating such datasets.  This
talk investigates the foundational research that allows successful
tools for these data exploration tasks: how to know when you have an
effective model of the dataset; how to correct bad models; how to
measure topic model effectiveness; and how to detect framing and spin
using these techniques.  After introducing topic models, I argue why
traditional measures of topic model quality---borrowed from machine
learning---are inconsistent with how topic models are actually used.
In response, I describe interactive topic modeling, a technique that
enables users to impart their insights and preferences to models in a
principled, interactive way.  I will then address measuring topic
model effectiveness in real-world tasks.  Finally, I'll discuss
ongoing collaborations with political scientists to use these
techniques to detect spin and framing in political and online
interactions.

================================================================
